alance
okay I pledge allegiance to the flag of
the United States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one nation
under God indivisible with liberty and
justice for
all uh since this is a uh more of a
question and answer session it's not a
typical uh Board of selectman meeting
we're not going to um conduct any
business other than reviewing the
proposed Charter revisions uh I will go
around and do public speak but I would
ask
to limit what we are actually actually
talk about in the charter questions
because you're going to have your
opportunity to speak to each one of the
questions as we go through this so uh I
am going to start with Katherine magaldi
Lewis unmute
Katherine Katherine you got on
mute can you hear me now we can there
you go okay sorry about that yeah all
right sorry about that um I have a
couple of questions there primarily
though for uh Carol Le and she was vice
chair of the charter
committee um and the first one actually
is when did the BOS actually decide a
revision was needed and what was the
committee given as a
charge given a charge we were told that
we would get our charge from the public
at our public
hearing
oh okay so at the public hearing then
what um revisions or suggestions
requests did you receive from the
public you fix the areas in the charter
that referenced May Municipal
elections we were asked to look
at select board versus Board of
Selectmen then we
were asked to look for a town look at
forming a Town
Council changing the elected town clerk
to
appointed
um giving the bo to select the authority
to create
ordinances and Expediting the budget
process so we vote on the same day as
the ram budget
refer and all that information's in the
minutes well I have my question is I
remember being there but I don't
remember anybody asking in the public
for a Town Council no I okay I did in
the middle the meetings oh okay and and
I'll get to that in the presentation
okay and were these suggestions then
submitted to the um chat members all the
requests and the suggestions that we had
all done at the meeting well Katherine
if you at that meeting if you were at
that meeting that first meeting we we
after the public hearing yes we met and
you stayed and we all talked all the
members of the board of the charter
revision commission talked about
different things that we might want to
bring forward to review okay yep I was
there remember I couldn't remember all
of it yeah it's fine I'm I'm all set
okay Celeste
Willard uh nothing at this time Jeff I'm
just listening if I have anything I'll
I'll let you know thank you Steve
Willard nothing at this time Jeff thank
you thanks Dave
ganian okay I think Dave's good there's
a phone number that's ends in 5475 if
you just state your name and let us know
question hi it's this is Leanne
Hutchinson um I have nothing right now
okay thank you lean um Elaine
Bart um hi I just I I actually worked at
our first day of early voting today and
I um and I have to say that the write up
that carolly has a whole bunch of copies
of that goes ahead and explains each
question um is wonderful um and I do
know that this is this election this
voting process is going to take a lot
longer than our usual voting process so
just because of all the questions that
need to be read read and responded to um
people should take advantage of early
voting and get down there and and take
your time and go ahead and vote
um because November 5th is going to be
very slow process but I just wanted to
to give a heads up and uh certainly we
will Point people to go to the town hall
if they're there while she's there the
town clerk is there which which is great
because it's the same hours that the
town clerk's office is open and if
people have questions about the
questions they can go up to Carol and
get that little write up but I just
wanted to to mention it it it's very
successful today thanks okay and to to
piggyback on that Elaine I asked Eric to
have uh all of that information put up
on the front of the homepage for the
town website so hopefully by tomorrow we
have that available online for anybody
that wants to have access to that yeah
that'd be great all right Bob hamburger
can you hear me we can yeah I just
wanted to thank everybody that was
involved with the commission um I was I
was humbled to be chosen as chair and uh
I just wanted to say that everybody who
participated you know we had quite a
task before us everybody brought
individual talents and skills uh to bear
and you know we had a lot of work to do
in a short time to do it and I just
wanted to uh say that I I think given
the constraints and given the challenge
before us everybody did uh did a great
job I look forward to seeing how the
voting goes on on the different issues
and uh you know I I love hearing all the
input that everybody that showed up
tonight uh is is gonna is going to
contribute so that's all I had to say
all right thank you
carolite I'm all set thanks all right
Shannon
Laden good evening I I guess the only
thing I'll say is having voted today um
I wish this meeting had been held
earlier and I'll save my questions for
when we're talking about the proposed
Charter revisions thanks okay um kubika
and and I'm sorry I don't have your
phone
name sorry sorry I tend to just go by
the one name because of work uh I have
no questions uh comments at this time um
I had seen the
revised with markup I would can't find
it right now on the the website but I
did see it the other day and uh I
thought it was mostly seem to be
clearing up some of the ambiguity in the
uh language legal being
legal thank you
um Michael S sin I'm sorry I'm not GNA
pronounce your your name properly
ctz all set thank you thank you Cath uh
Kathleen Hutchinson or Katherine
Hutchinson I have nothing at this time
thank
you um
Bata nothing at the moment thanks Jeff
okay Louise
Goodwin I just want to say uh Elaine
made a good point I saw on the news
there's a lot of people standing in line
waiting to vote so I think it would be
an excellent thing for people because we
have so much time to do that to go early
and do that other than that I'm all set
thanks Leanne
Hutchinson no thanks okay Kimberly
psan I'm almost that thank you Abby
Cole here to listen today thank you all
right Stephen Stephen King nothing at
this time thank you Joan
Ebert hi just a quick comment I'm sorry
if it's already been mentioned it
probably was we just need to do a
revision to the front page and add the D
for
Andover
um thank you for that and then I'd be
remiss with my with my eyes not to
mention that in my job um I did want to
mention my I will probably speak again
later because I do want to listen but
I'm really not in favor of changing
anything with the budget process um I
like the way our town currently handles
it I know that it takes a lot of time I
know that um I I hope I'm allowed to
speak publicly I mean everybody else is
so I am a member of the board of Finance
so I know how much time and effort it
takes to you know pour through documents
and and the whole process and to speed
that up and rush it really scares me
truthfully so and I like the process of
the budget meetings the town coming
together um so I'm not in favor of any
of those changes and I wanted to say
that thank you Sharon St
Rock I was also hoping to vote today but
I felt like I did not have enough
information so hopefully uh this evening
uh the conversation will help uh me make
an informed Choice when I do decide to
vote thank
you Philip
hovi well I've just come to U kind of
lurk listen to whatever he was saying
I've been away all summer and I'm trying
to catch up with the um with the the
ballot issues um so I'll be listening
and I'll be working the polls uh for
early voting kind of excited about that
thank you thank you very much uh
Katherine Kathleen Ward
okay let's skip Liz low
catch hi thank you uh I'm just uh
listening for now thanks so much no
problem uh
Kathleen okay and the phone number that
ends in 2345
okay so I'm gonna go back to Kathleen I
don't know your last name roers hi
Kathleen see I gave you the five minutes
you got through public speak perfect no
comment thank you okay uh Sarah Becker
I'm sorry Jeff can you repeat that I
just
joined um we're in the middle of public
speak so we're just giving you an
opportunity to say anything you want
before we get started I'm just calling
in nope that's okay Jeff I'll set all
right um and again the phone number that
ends in um
2345 okay did I miss anyone anyone like
to add anything
okay so uh and I apologize for missing
the D in my presentation that's terrible
Joan Ebert thank you for calling me out
on that I I shouldn't have missed the D
um so what I did was I prepared this
presentation but I also have a few other
things for everyone to sit there and see
so this is the ballot that we're all
going to end up at the holes with um the
top of the ballots sits there and goes
through the party and the individuals
and what we're focusing on is the
questions the vote on the
questions so uh I believe that this
information was put up on the website as
a sample so that if you can sit there
and pull that up why you're in this we
can sit there and and deal with all of
these but in my presentation I do read
out each one of the questions so I'm
going to sit there and come back to the
question and I'm going to get
started so uh this goes into what
Katherine was sitting there asking about
the charter revision commission the
board of Selectmen voted on April 8th to
establish a charter revision commission
and then the board of Selectmen
appointed the members to the Charter
revision Commission on May 7th uh the
individuals that uh we had I believe 13
and we took a a board of seven so we had
requested the board of Selectmen
requested that final report to complete
it by September 1st 2024 to ensure that
the questions could be on the ballot for
November
5th so the committee members that were
selected were Robert hamburger who is uh
voted as chairperson for the committee
Carol Lee who was voted the vice chair
um men of the committee Jody gross who
was voted in as the secretary for the
committee and then um members in um
without specific roles were Patricia
Billings Karen midor Jeff Maguire and
Adrien
mandaville so the charter revision
commission had nine meetings we had
those meetings between May 22nd and July
17th of
20124 um the charter revision commission
discussed various uh different things
that we wanted to potentially see
related to the Charter and our goal was
to try to make the town government as
efficient as possible and and there's
been some conversation as
to uh why this was started and this
Charter revision commission I wanted to
sit there and see this Charter revision
Commission because I wanted to see
questions get on the ballot for a
presidential election and everyone is
sitting there there's a lot of
conspiracy theories Andover is pretty
well known for conspiracy theories and
those conspiracy theories are that Jeff
Maguire or other members Bob hamburger
were driving forth some issues that
that's not how the process worked so uh
Jeff Maguire wanted to bring forth A
Town Council form of government and my
simple reason for this was efficiency in
that we have some things that the town
should look to correct so a Town Council
form of government would consolidate the
board of finance and the board of
Selectmen it would create a seven-
member board because now with the Town
Administrator what we have is the Town
Administrator preparing the budget for
the town and what I would like to see
and what I think would be positive for
the town of Andover is a seven member
board that would sit there and do the um
overarching uh Focus for what the town
should be looking to do and also control
the financial aspects of what's doing so
right now what happens is because we now
have a Town Administrator that prepares
the budget it then goes to the board of
Finance to be reviewed and to be
implemented and then it sits there and
gets voted on by the public at the Town
budget meeting um what I wanted to sit
there and see is because I've been on
the board of Selectmen for about 10
years now and we have a five- member
board and every time we come up for an
election all five members run and what
my belief is is that we would be a much
better organized group if we ran similar
to the board of education or what now is
the board of finance and you have seven
members four members run in uh odd years
three members run in excuse me four
members run in even years three members
run in odd years and you have a
consistency of the board and it's not a
total redo because the the second
election I ran I was the only member of
the board of Selectmen that continued
over uh this last election all five
members continued and um or or ran uh
they did not continue but we they ran so
that was my idea and what I did was I
brought that up to the board the charter
revision commission and it was a little
bit too much for everybody to understand
and to want to take on for what we were
challenged with and and honestly I was
okay with that because what I wanted is
to bring it forward to the community
because I do believe it's in the best
interest of the community so that was
Jeff Maguire's reason for the charter
revision commission what I wanted to
present then what we ended up doing is
we ended up taking all of the ideas that
were out there of things that could be
done to make town government more
efficient and we all evaluated them so
Bob hamburger was the chairperson Carol
Lee was the vice chairperson we went
through each of the issues that were
brought up and each of the members of
the the board the charter revision
commission were given a topic to review
and to come back to the board and
discuss and we all went through each
things and not everyone's uh item ended
up being brought into the revisions that
we made but it was a very good board and
honestly it was it was a very good board
and everybody participated and everybody
sat there and brought their ideas forth
and everybody voted on each of the items
that we finally brought into the draft
that went to the the board of Select so
that's related to the Charter revision
commission and and listen anybody want
to ask a question please raise your hand
unmute yourself this is a question and
answer this is not
a I'm not I I want everybody to ask
their questions so that we know what
we're after so these are the ballot
questions that are out there if you sit
there and you go through your ballot
question ballot question one is shall
the constitution of the state of
Conneticut be amended to permit General
Assembly to allow each voter to vote by
absentee ballot this question is related
to the Connecticut Constitution not the
the Andover Charter and what it's doing
is currently we have uh rules that
require you to say that you're either
out of town or you have a reason to get
an absentee ballot what the state is
doing now is and what they're trying to
get the the Constitution changed to is
that there's no reason required for any
boat voter to vote by absentee ballot
that's question one it's a yes or no
question you vote whichever way you
choose to on that item that's not
related to the Andover Charter state of
Connecticut it's on every ballot within
the state of
Connecticut okay question number two uh
ballot question two shall the town
Charter be revised to require regular
Town elections in November of odd years
instead of in May Jeff real quick Louise
had her hand up for the first ballot
question oh I'm sorry Louise go ahead
yeah no problem um actually is for all
the questions I just want ask and have
everybody here um did are all these
revisions were they all kind of reviewed
by the town attorney yes okay and
approved of yes okay thank you and and
the questions that the the questions
need to go to the Secretary of State's
office and they're also reviewed by the
state of Connecticut to make sure that
the questions are are written correctly
for the ballot for the ballot okay okay
thanks Jeff
y okay question two relates to voting uh
the town of Andover um since the initial
Charter was written voted in the month
of May of odd years the local elections
were were may this is to move that in
the charter to November we currently
vote in November because of State
Statute and law passed by state of
Connecticut we're just trying to change
the town Charter to sit there and
correspond with that to sit there and
say we're going to vote in November as
opposed to
May any questions related to that that
item uh Philip H has his hand up yeah go
ahead yeah the question is the uh so
this is basically driven by the state
rather than a choice by um uh the town
uh it is the state is requiring November
elections unless we make a decision to
vote in May
which not anyone on the charter revision
commission was looking to continue May
elections yeah we we missed that because
they the Secretary of State's office
hold the
towns five remaining May towns if they
wanted to keep elections in may we would
have to have a town meeting and allow
the people in the town to vote to keep
the election in May and if the town
failed to hold that special town meeting
by December 31 of
2022 we would automatically go to
November elections in
2020 okay thank
you and Shannon Lowden also has her hand
up thanks um I'm just curious that it's
now required by State Statute what
happens if we vote against it as a town
um then we would have a charter that
doesn't comply with State Statute
thanks so Shannon I'm guess you're
saying vote Yes for this because it
makes sense to change our Charter I'm
saying what happens if we go against
State Statute Jeff okay I got we can't
it's just we wouldn't be in
compliance with what the way we're doing
business right there there's a bunch of
sorry Carol go
ahead there's a bunch of these questions
that are really just simple logistical
questions that were just the charter
revision commission was trying to just
get changed and this is one of them
so okay Katherine I'm sorry real quickly
though if it already went into effect is
this question even a worthwhile
question like Shannon just said even if
we don't vote we've it's already gone
into effect that now we have November
elections because we never ask the town
to vote on it well what we're trying to
do is get the charter in alignment with
the state statutes so it's just a
technical issue of trying to change that
you could leave it and vote no and then
we're still G to vote in November so
we're just trying to get the to match up
everything so okay okay
anybody
else
okay uh ballot question three shall the
town Charter be revised to delete the
rule that resignation of any member of
any board or similar body be accepted by
the board of Selectmen so this is really
just
a what's the difference if the board of
Selectmen accepts a resignation if
someone resigns they resign it doesn't
need to be accepted by the board of
Selectmen
of SE selectman is made aware of the
resignation and then we move through the
process of what we need to do to
potentially replace that individual or
the board that is involved will go
through and and work to replace that
individual but to sit there and say in
the charter that the board of Selectmen
needs to accept the resignation to me as
irrelevant okay yeah Stephen has his
hand up my only question would be would
would there be any reference to timing
regarding that or is that based on uh
the minutes and and uh how is that uh uh
because there there are certain things
that are timed based based upon a
resignation and uh requests for uh
Replacements someone submitting a
resignation submits the resignation to
the town clerk and to the chairperson of
the board and then the timing related to
the replacement of that individual
starts from really when the Tom clerk
gets it and it submits it back to the
members Joanne Hebert also has her hand
up just a followup to what Stephen said
too I I totally understand why this
would be easier and why we would want to
enact this just to take away the
formality but it
does it it just alerts the town when it
comes up at a board of Selectmen meeting
um and your you accept it it just you
know people that take time to watch the
meetings and everything it just makes it
more public in case people aren't aware
so that would be my only thought on that
well currently in our in the board of
Selectmen minutes every month we have a
resignation line item so any
resignations are listed there I think
it's just a technical issue are we
accepting the resignation or receiving
notification of the that it's just
terminology so the question is
acceptance you okay in reality if Joanne
if I resigned as the you know from the
board of Selectmen is the board of
Selectmen going to accept my resignation
or receive my resignation and then move
forward to make the appropriate uh steps
to replace me that would be the
issue thanks
yeah anybody
else okay ballot question four shall the
town Charter be revised to require that
any Charter revision commission
established after a mandatory board of
selectman review be given at least six
months to submit their draft report to
the
board um this is just a saying th this
was based upon uh members of the charter
revision commission uh identifying that
they were being um put under a time
crunch to sit there and get this back
for September it was a request EST that
was made during the course of the
meetings that there should be additional
time granted to Future Charter revision
commissions and it was something that
the charter revision commission sat
there and thought that we should try to
get changed so it's basically any other
future board of Selectmen that requests
a charter revision commission has to
provide them with a minimum of six
months to complete their work they could
do their work in less time but they're
given a minimum of six
months so the time in of these uh
Charter revisions uh needs to be
evaluated by Future Board of selectman
or if we if this board of Selectmen
determines they want to sit there and do
it
again the next Charter revision
commission would be given six months to
complete their
task any
questions
okay ballot question five
shall the town Charter be revised to
permit the director of health or animal
control officer position to be filled by
an entity as well as an individual
person um the current Charter calls for
employees to fill these
positions we technically are utilizing
uh Services outside of that to perform
those task so right now for the director
of Health that is performed by Eastern
Health uh Eastern Highland health
district and so we're trying to just
revise the charter so it allows for a
subcontractor or a another company to
perform those tasks without having it to
be an individual because that's what's
called out or an employee that's what's
called out for currently in the
charter any questions on that
item Mr hovy um again is that the only
two um uh organizations um or
departments um that can that can get
that um be an entity or are there other
in the town
um uh in the town departments um who
might be um fulfilled with an
entity those are the two that are called
out for in the charter that we
identified there are you know right now
uh we sit there and contract out
services
to the building
department and I'm trying to think of
any other Eric that we actually
Outsource that are not
employees uh Youth Services Bureau would
be one that's through through
the through ahm ahm I was trying to say
I was going to say Ram but it's ahm yeah
right who else do we use anybody else
uh we're Contracting out our IT services
through the town of South
Windsor
um uh as you already talked about the
Animal control officer is we are using
the Northeast Council of government's
animal control services to cover the
town of
Andover um you know and as employees
leave and are replaced we always look at
the potential for savings using shared
Services as opposed to a discret
employee so Mr
hog those ones though Eric that you
mentioned are not part of section 702
for the
administrative the only ones are the
town assessor building official
Municipal agent director of Health
Animal control officer tree wardens
sanitarian Wetlands zoning enforcement
Treasurer Town
attorney Town engineer and Police
Service uh Public Works and tax
collected so the only ones that we're
Outsourcing right now is building to
Bolton easn Highlands health district
and MOG for animal control the ahm and
the other ones you mentioned are not
identified in our
chart so Carol just let me ask you a
question is the town attorney identified
as an employee within the charter the
town attorney is identified as an
administrative position
and he's identified as your appoint you
appoint him
[Music]
and okay but the te the terminology for
the director of health and the Animal
control officer within the current
Charter was to have them be an
employee right so it says a
sanitarian
um and
then director of health so before we
used to have actual doctor that was the
director of health and then the Town
Sent okay when the charter was
originally written okay so this was this
is trying to change some wording on
those two positions because they call
out employees specifically and we do not
um they're not full-time positions and
they're not positions that the town
would be financially wanting to employ
someone for so that's why we Outsource
those and we're just trying to change
some terminology within the charter so
that's just aligning these two uh
positions with what we're already doing
with other positions correct thank you
good any other questions on ballot
question
five and just as a side note even if
ballot question five
fails uh the state the state this year
uh passed a series of measures that make
it easier for towns to collaborate with
each other so you would still be able to
share services with another municipality
or a cog um regardless of what the
town's charger says about an individual
position under current state law as I
understand okay understood any other
questions on ballot question
five okay
oh back up Leanne
Hutchins yes um I assume that just the
question itself is going to be on the
ballot and not the explanatory paragraph
that's um my question is I read the top
where it says as well as that I would
read that to imply that you can have an
individual and an entity doing the same
thing because it doesn't say an
individual or an entity that's correct
so would it
be is the intent of it to have an
individual or an entity as opposed to
like for example the animal controlled
cision um position having the um is it
neck nekog that we use now
neog
correct could we have them and still
have somebody who's an Andover resident
or a town employee could we have both or
is this meant to say you could have one
or the
other you would only want to have one or
the other because it's costing us too
much money to have both so you're either
giving the town the opportunity and the
authority to sit there and have either
an employee on the books if it's
financially prudent or to sit there and
Outsource it to a third
party okay well that makes sense I just
I read it several times in the way I
would read it again because of the
wording as well as I personally would
read it that you might end up with one
of each an individual again a resident
or a town employee already or another
entity that's just the way I read it
understood thank you you would never you
would never want to do that just to sit
there and it's a financial issue but
it's giving flexibility to the town to
sit there
and pick the best way to sit there and
fill those
positions
okay anyone
else okay ballot question
six shall a town Charter be revised so
that starting in November of 2027
instead of being elected the town clerk
will be appointed by the board of
Select that is how the question is
written so um before I get to you Dian
or Diane is
joining the uh the to Clark's office is
the information center of the town and
to be really honest Carol Lee has done
an exceptional job and Carol I didn't
ask you this last Friday how many years
have you
been have you filled the town clerk's
position since 2003 I have been the town
clerk but I started in
[Music]
almost so you were the assist assistant
town clerk for the years in the
beginning right okay
so you know basically ter Carol's office
does a significant amount of work within
the community and as everybody on this
call understands Carol Lee has done a
tremendous job no one is this is not
about Carol Lee this is not
about trying to do something that is
going to be a negative this is where the
town Charter we we changed the first
selectman from
the the CEO of the town to the Town
Administrator and why did we do that
back in you know I guess it's about six
years ago now why did we do that we did
that because you can never guarantee who
you're going to elect into a position a
professional position such as the first
Elman and to guarantee that they can do
the job in an appropriate fashion so
um we as a town all voted to sit there
and move the first Selectmen and you
know basically appoint a Town
Administrator and from my perspective
that is the best thing that's happened
to this town since I've been involved um
it
has professionalized the position and
has allowed us to do do things that we
would never have done with a part-time
individual as the first select so that
is what the intention of this change is
to do so the town clerk's job is is not
a simple job and this issue is not
related to Carol it's related to the
next individual that comes in and runs
because the Democratic town committee
and the Republican Town committee would
each select an individual who lives in
the town of Andover to run for the town
town clerk's position and that
individual may have never worked in the
town clerk's office that individual may
not have any of the training related to
the town clerk's job and they would be
voted in based upon the results of that
election so that is where this is coming
from this is trying to move to a
position where we can select somebody
potentially from out of town we could ex
we could appoint the assistant town
clerk currently and that individual
would then become the Town Clerk and an
employee of the town and the one thing
that everybody needs to understand is
the board of Selectmen does not
appoint does not just arbitrarily
appoint anyone to any position the board
of Selectmen would sit there and
identify that we have a job to fill the
uh a hiring committee would be selected
one member of the board of Selectmen
would be on that one member of the board
of Finance would be on that uh Town
clerks from other towns would be on that
and they would evaluate all the resumés
received they would conduct interviews
and they would come back to the board of
Selectmen and make a recommendation as
to who would be the appropriate
candidate for that position that's how
every position within the town of
Andover is
filled Jeff Maguire Jeff Murray Scott
pson and CR we don't sit there and just
say we were going to app point x that's
not how it works there's a process and
you go through that process for every
position that you would want to fill
that's how the Town Administrator was
filled and that's even
how uh all of the positions are filled
it's a hiring committee recommendation
made and then an appointment made it's
not what it's been stated out there that
we're going to just appoint whoever we
want it's not how it works Katherine
mcal Lewis uh wait a second yeah you
were up first I know I I
was well mine's real quick yeah um it's
I've said this before I there are pros
and cons to both and um and I understand
pros and cons to both and I don't have a
I'm not against it however I think that
it should be stated somewhere that if
the board of Selectmen is going to app
point then that role can change every
four years I think that's something
people should know I don't it's not
against the appointment it's just that
that's a that's a big thing that every
four years you might have somebody new
in there that's
all well that's the same thing you would
have in an election and the goal would
not to do that and that that's you know
the reason Carol Le's been in that
position for 21 years
um nobody wants to change that position
but eventually Carol Le is going to
retire and it has nothing to do with
Carol Le no it has nothing to do with
Carol Lee but it does Carol Le is going
to want to retire and then at that
election we're going to vote on somebody
that potentially has no
qualifications well I would hope not but
okay I don't see how I don't see any way
around not voting on somebody that
doesn't the only way to sit there and do
it is if someone moved into town and
because they have to be a town resident
to run in our election they'd have to
move into town and they would have to
sit there and want the position and then
they'd have I mean I don't see it
happening I mean it would be different
if we could sit there and vote for the
assistant Town Clerk and she wanted to
fill the role but I don't believe Carol
your assistant lives in town
currently he does not she does not so
she wouldn't
qualify so is it an I'm sorry can I just
clarify is that an indefinite position
then or does it
automatically get looked at again every
every four
years I mean you hired and then you're
hired or you're hired you know you you'd
have to you you know just like any
position within the town you'd have to
sit there
and you have to you have to get moved
for cause I mean it's not as if okay we
consider sit there and as a board of
Selectmen just make a change because
we're the board of Selectmen
um you know that this is where everybody
sits there and thinks different things
the board of Selectmen just doesn't wave
a wand and say we're gonna make changes
we don't want to make changes I
Katherine I would never want to make a
change to the town clerk if if I we
didn't have to um it's just a question
of are we as a community wanting to vote
on someone that doesn't and I'm I'm just
telling you I could you can almost sit
there and see it would never be someone
with qualifications but we're going to
have to vote on a town clerk so the next
election that Carol Lee doesn't run
because Carol Lee is running Carol Le's
winning she gets the most votes out of
anyone in town she's on both party lines
it doesn't matter no one's going to run
against Carol now I don't think the
Republican Town committee or the
Democrat Town committee have ever put
anyone up against Carol Lee since she's
won the first
election Carol has anyone run against
you since you won your first
election no no okay and rightfully so we
shouldn't so what's the I I guess my
question to the community and everybody
else
is this is just an issue of down the
road how we we're sitting and looking at
this and even if this question loses
it's going to come back up again because
we're going to face it some sometime so
we're just trying to get ahead of this
and this was an issue that we addressed
um it's an issue that's brought up in a
lot of other towns it's issues that it's
an issue that's failed in other towns
it's an issue that continue to get
brought up but like I said eventually
Carol Lee is going to decide she's not
running and that's going to put the
Republican Town committee and the
Democratic town Committee in a position
to find someone that's that wants to run
for Town Clerk and why are they going to
run they're going to run because it's a
job and they're going to get paid x
amount of money they're not going to be
qualified and then the community is
going to have an issue that we're going
to sit there and potentially suffer or
we could sit there and make it a an
employee position an appointed position
and the individual could sit there and
be from out of town we could select the
assistant town clerk to fill that spot
and that's all this is
about any other questions on this uh
Elaine
botard um yeah I just I I I I understand
the confusion that Katherine has because
it has been verbalized that every four
years maybe you know you'd relook at the
town clerk position but in the question
and in the explanation of the question
there is no mention of doing this every
four years it's kind of a we're
hiring and as things you know go on with
people who are working for the town you
know if they leave or if they are not
doing a great job and we need to remove
them or they're great and we just want
to keep them that's all there the
flexibility is all
there but I know verbally it was
mentioned every four years but it's
nowhere in this statement well I believe
that what you're stating is that in that
in the information they're appointed
every four years it's
not I mean if a board of Selectmen is
doing their job they're not going to
they're not going to determine they need
to appoint someone to replace someone
doing a good job and I and I really and
I would sit there and I would go back I
don't even think that's legal that you
you'd have to go for cause on someone
it's not that simple and
and if I was ever on the board of
Selectmen you know in a in the position
that the the four years came up if the
individual is doing a good job the
individual is getting
reappointed right but nowhere in the
does it say there's going that there's
going to be a review every four years it
does in the charter elain the proposed
draft of the charter oh it does oh okay
because the question mentioned that
mailer that went out the office of the
town clerk shall have permanent
status pursuant to the options set forth
in general statute 9-1 185 beginning
with the November 2nd 2027 election to
clerk shall no longer be elected rather
onor after November 16 2027 and every
four years thereafter Board of Selectmen
most recently elected in the November
municipal election felt on or after two
weeks following the Gate of their
election by a minimum of three votes
appoint a qualified person to be town
cler to work in that
capacity okay so that's where the four
years is coming from I'm just saying if
you're coming in and the first time
you're exposed to this question and
explanation you don't see anything about
that four-year relook that's
all U Were there other individuals that
had questions related to
this uh yeah um this is Phil
Hy uh I couldn't quite make out what
Carly was saying there was a garbling in
um my reception but my understanding
then is um once
appointed um through the hiring process
um the the uh this position then H is
goes through basically a job evaluation
every four years um is that correct and
then also is there something in the um
uh the
Clark's um contract or letter of
agreement that protects him or her
does the question make
sense it does but I don't necessarily
know that there's
Protections in a contract because we've
never drafted the contract I mean this
this would go into effect three years
from now um we would sit there and have
to work that out with the town attorney
um
but the the issue that that Carol raises
is that
the verbage within the charter is that
it's reappointed every four years and
the concern from the public which I
totally get and is that every new board
of Selectmen is going to potentially be
able to change the Tom clerk which would
be foolish but that's what could happen
so
um you know there's there's
U that's actually something that
actually I believe probably needs to be
addressed we might have to call a new
Charter revision Commission because uh I
could understand the concern over it I
don't think that the
intent was to be negative like that but
I could understand where people are
would be concerned about that um I just
know as a member of the board of
stuckman I'm not changing the town clerk
if they're doing a good job and there's
not an issue and I don't think the town
clerk I think if the town clerk was
having an issue and we're having an
issue with the Town Clerk and legally we
could do it we wouldn't wait till the
four years were up we would do it
beforehand that would be me but I I do
understand the concern over that um how
it is stated within the text of the
charter revision so I can only tell you
that the the thought of doing this is is
appropriate in that
we do need to sit there as a community
and move to this to sit there and be
able to have that position filled by a
qualified individual in the future so I
understand the benefit of having a
hiring process for uh the candidate uh
when when a vacancy happens um I'm just
wondering if like in four years if you
have a a vindictive Board of Selectmen
or select people just you know out of
the air saying okay time to get rid of
this person because we don't like her or
him um that's the only I'm concerned
about because you're changing
essentially from a high from a from a an
elected office to a hired office and
then there doesn't appear to be any
wording for uh protection
um or how the review uh Job review
happens and you know how we replace the
object of um of running it again in four
years that's all uh Liz
lat yeah I was just wondering if you
could I know you you mentioned it and it
kind of went over too fast for my brain
how the the interview process would work
and who the quote unquote interview
committee would be is that something
that would be different every year or
how would that be
chosen well it changes by
position normally what would occur is a
member of the board of Selectmen would
be appointed to the interview committee
we would request a member of the board
of Finance to be in the on the committee
we would then move out and we would
probably request for the Town
Administrator to be on that committee
and then we would go out and normally
you deal with a current town clerk so
when we just interviewed for the uh
the director of the community center we
brought in the uh director of uh
coventry's Community Center and she came
in and was on the interview committee
and so that's that's normally how the
process will work so you'll sit there
and you can have four or five you can
have upwards of seven people if you
chose to on that interview committee and
then you just evaluate the resumés and
you you allow the candidates to come in
and you interview them and went through
the process and we graded each of the
individuals for the senior committee and
then we made a recommendation to the
board of Selectmen and the board of
Selectmen appointed the individual so
that's that's normally how the process
works um who's on that committee might
differ each time in each
position any other questions
Liz um I mean thoughts but questions no
thank you okay uh Stephen King yeah um
you touched upon some concerns that I
had um obviously it would make sense to
ensure that you have somebody with
appropriate credentials for the position
however that individual is currently
elected by the people as are the board
of Selectmen and you could make the same
argument of the board of Selectmen that
you're trying to make for uh the town
clerk uh and the town clerk essentially
becomes a job at the will of the board
of Selectmen I understand you're going
to have committees making
recommendations but the bottom line is
the board of Selectmen decide whether or
not to hire that individual uh the
people elect the board of Selectmen I
think the people should elect the town
clerk understood and that's why Stephen
we went and we changed the first
selectman from being the chief executive
officer of the town to basically being
the chairman of the board so we have an
individual that's in the position and
has professionalized the position so
that's the same logic that has was being
is being applied here and was being
applied by the charter revision
commission
so was Stephen
finished I was just going to mention
that you know just argument that uh um
that an individual um make sure you vet
the individual properly at the board
level I think that it's appro it's just
as appropriate to vet them uh by the
general public the population of Andover
um I I understand what you're saying but
those same people elect the board of
Selectmen why shouldn't those people be
have have the opportunity to to elect uh
the town clerk because there's not the
technical requirement the board of
Selectmen as there is for the town clerk
so the board of Selectmen is uh really
the current Board of Selectmen what we
are are as we're the board of directors
of the town we sit there and advise the
chief executive officer of the town the
Town Administrator as to what we were
choosing to do when we're electing a
town clerk we're electing someone that
is that is dealing with all of the vital
records of the community has to follow
all of the legal requirements of the
state as they file and record all of the
documents uh it's not the same it's just
not the same you're not electing um
you're not electing a a selectman listen
Stephen we've had we've had select
people who are terrible it didn't matter
because they're not they're not
impacting transactional information
they're not doing something and we've
had first Elmen that we voted for before
we made this change that were terrible
and they impacted the town negatively
and that's the truth that's why we went
to a Town Administrator that's why you
know I wanted to sit there and see a
Town Administrator because the the issue
with the select man and especially the
first selectman is he's he's part-time
and then he's getting paid um you know
in the case when we first started this
you know the the the first selectman was
really pocketing $100,000 between his
salary and his benefits and you cannot
qualify that I might have come in and
done a great job I might not come in and
done a terrible job but that's not what
my role is anymore that's not what the
first selectman's role is anymore town
clerk is is a position that has
technical requirements that we're
extremely lucky to have Carol Lee that
when the Republican Town committee and
the Democratic town committee select
someone to run they're not going to go
through the process of qualifying
somebody because you're not going to
have anybody that you can qualify I'm
just flat out telling you I don't see
that anyone is g to be running for that
office that has gone through the
training and the requirements to sit
there and be a town clerk
I recognize your concerns but again I
just I just feel that it should be a
vote of the people thank you understood
Bob
hamburger um I just wanted to take a
step back and point out for the
remainder of the public that's appearing
here just to foresee the kind of
questions that they might be asking that
there's three pieces of information here
that can be looked at we have the the
ballot questions themselves which are
the most condensed reduced summarized uh
statement of of the issues and they had
to be summarized like that in order to
fit on the ballot we have the
presentation that you've got online here
and which um they're handing out at at
the polling place at Town Hall which
amplifies on these issues and gives some
background but if people want to see the
full detail of what's happening to the
Charter that is available on the town's
website if they were to go to government
and then appointed commissions the
charter review commission 2024 they can
see the full text of what's being
deleted and what's being added it's
colorcoded and that's really some of the
the questions that are being asked right
now could uh could be avoided if people
just went and and looked at at uh the
in-depth ISS what's actually happening
to the Charter so that's Point number
one um I just wanted to point out now
Jeff you mentioned we may have to come
back when it comes to the um the
question of the um the town clerk I'll
just throw out there for everybody's uh
listening pleasure and and thought that
right now we have the the reappointment
uh term being stated as lining up with
the election of the board of Selectmen
something that can be suggested and
considered by a future Charter review
commission is to stagger that by two
years so that the board of selectman has
to come in they have to be seated they
have to be in the position for two years
before they could take a look at the uh
the town clerk I think that in and of
itself might lend some stability to the
entire process and Jeff I I see you I
see you nodding and thinking you want to
you want to jump in and say something
here well I I can I I agree with you
that on that point the twoe Staggering
but we don't even need to reappoint the
individual you know we don't need to say
we didn't need to say that I I in
essence you know thinking about it why
did we sit there and say we were going
to reappoint the Tom clerk the Tom clerk
has a position until there's a an issue
of concern or a reason for um for
potential termination and then you sit
there and you go through the process of
rehiring but it's usually with cause
it's usually it's got to be with cause I
I don't see any other way of doing it
with than without cause so maybe what we
did Bob is we added some complexity to
this that we didn't need to add and we
could have just sat there and said it
was a you know it was an it's an
appointed position and it'd be just like
any other employee um you do an
evaluation it's good or bad you know and
you move on so I believe we were
reflecting some of the language that's
in place for Eric for the Town
Administrator so we were trying to to
keep these positions as parallel as
possible in in the language that that we
employed so if I if I recall our
meetings that was the rationale behind
this um so a third thing that I wanted
to bring up you've mentioned a number of
times the board of Selectmen has a a
distinct uh well delineated process for
a number of different procedures for for
how we hire how how you impanel a hiring
committee uh let me ask are these things
documented anywhere is there a board of
selectman operating manual
you know for lack of a better term um
and and if not maybe this is another
thing that the board of Selectmen should
consider moving forward so that there is
again continuity in how things are done
and transparency within the
process I would tell you the answer to
that is no and we should sit there and
get with the Town Administrator and get
those things in
place okay that's all I've got right now
no problem Steve Willard
yeah Jee I I don't know I think I can
summarize this in one sentence um this
changes it from just being able to
choose a clerk from the voters the
electorates in to in town to opening it
up to anybody could be could be in this
position that's all I've got to
say thank you Joan Ebert I'll be very
brief too Jeff um I I see this as a very
important position in town and and agree
with a lot of the points you're bringing
forth as far as you know we need we need
someone that um is capable of handling
all the important things that Carol has
handled for so long um and looking to
the Future my one scare was you know the
four-year thing you've kind of amended
that um and then I just wanted to say
for the people that are here I have had
the privilege of sitting on an interview
committee with the town um that's
something that I do in my job in it was
very very professional we all took it
very seriously we did a lot of the
things that Jeff said um as far as going
through
applications um you know really looking
for qualified people um and they did do
a good job um the only thing that would
have scared me before this was the
four-year term and someone being afraid
to lose their their job thank
you okay anybody else have any other
questions on ballot question six
okay so before I move on to a ballot
question S
n
10 those are all related to the budget
and they're all related to the town
meeting so I want to go through and I
want to give everybody a little bit
historical perspective as to why these
were being considered and what we
thought so the town of Andover was uh
chartered in 1848 1848 1848 says it
right there on the logo thank you
1848 um I went to the town clerk's
office because the town clerk keeps all
of our Vital Records and keeps all the
minutes of everything that previously
occurred within the town as best they
can so I went
backwards and I looked at voting records
from 1900 1925 and 1950 and be really
honest I loved how they did it back in
1900 1925 1950 they basically put out
there that the way they put it on their
their nice written script documents was
these are the voters we have on the list
these are the voters that cast
ballots so in 1900 there were a 100
registered voters in the town of and and
over 79 cast ballots 79 percentage 79%
voting that's awesome
1925 the population increased by 98
individuals or registered voters by 98
individuals 163 of them cast ballots
82.3 2% in 1950 you can see after World
War II we had an explosion in population
there was 300
539 uh registered voters in town 469 of
them went to the polls and voted that
year at
87.1% so the that's and over historical
voting when they were doing the town
meeting and you had 100 people that
lived in town and they they came and
they voted
so I want you to sit there and go
through our town budget meeting
attendance over the last five
years um I'll start at the bottom and
work my way up in in 2019 we had 2235
voters 7 22 uh people attended the town
meeting in 2020 covid we did not have a
town meeting in 2021 we had 2296 people
71 people showed up to vote
3.09% in 2022 we had two budget votes
the first was May
4th
2330 80 people attended the town
meeting
3.43% May 2022 a second time the budget
went before the town meeting the same
number of registered voters 91 people
showed up 3.91% in the budget passed to
move to
referendum in May of 2023
2367 registered voters 78 made it to the
town meeting
3.3% in May of
2386 voters 42 registered voters came to
attend the town meeting let me tell you
one thing about this of those 42 people
that came to vote at the town meeting a
minimum of 12 of them were elected
officials so there were 30 people from
the public that came to our town meeting
to move the budget to referend just so
everybody understands and is aware of
what's going on now I want to go to the
reason why these votes are being dealt
with we have a $12 million budget
give or take and I'm just rounding
numbers so everybody can be aware the
ram budget is $4 million the AES budget
is $4 million and the town budget is $4
million we currently have two referendum
votes we have the ram budget vote that's
in the beginning of May and then usually
a week later we go to do the town V vote
so these are the same registered number
of Voters those are the votes cast you
can sit there and see the percentages
for yourself Year bye in 2024 we had
4.95% of the voters go to the polls to
vote on the ram
budget now a week later we go to the
polls again and we do the town
budget we usually get better attendance
at the Town budget we end up in double
digits we've exceeded
22%
twice so we're not the 79% of 1900 we're
not the 80% of of 1950 we're 20
2% right the reason for all of these
issues all seven8 nine and 10 is to
consolidate the voting for the budget
referendums to one date so that more
people show up to vote on the $4 million
for the ram piece of our budget and we
consolidate that budget that that
referendum vote to include both RAM and
the town budget that's that's what we're
trying trying to do there's nothing toar
is there's nothing we're trying to get
out there and have some Authority or
control over it's just a simple fact
that people don't vote and we're making
them go twice in a limited amount of
time and they don't show up and it would
be much better to have 22% of the people
sit there and evaluate the ram budget at
the same time they're evaluating the Tom
budget all right so now I'm going to go
through the questions and I'm going to
tell you what we might be losing by any
of these issues
right go ahead Elaine
Bart yes I I I just wanted to point out
a lot of the problem with the I mean the
ram referendum for the budget was on a
Tuesday as our general elections are
unfortunately the Andover budget vote
was on a
Monday and it confused the heck out of
people that's all
I just want to say if they can be on the
same day that would be so much better
okay so our town budget votes are always
on a Tuesday link for the charter oh
sorry about that which one was on Monday
was that the municipal election the
municipal election yes oh sorry we've
already taken care of that and doing it
on November
sorry okay Joan Hebert before I get
started go ahead yeah just because it
does seem to be a theme of wanting the
two um voting things to happen on the
same day is there a reason we can't talk
to RAM and see why their's is I mean do
they have laws and bylaws that they're
following why theirs has to be when it
is versus stat State Statute says that
the regional budget referendum has to be
the Tuesday following the first Monday
in
May you can't do anything about that
okay so it's so what statute Carol thank
you
what it's a statute I'll it's a state
statute I can get the number for you Jo
I don't have it right off the top of my
head but I know what the state said I
mean I've often thought it was a problem
and I understand the reason for wanting
to get them together because we never
you know no matter how many letters you
write to the editor talking about the
ram budget Etc you're right the voters
don't come out so um okay thank you for
answering that all right so ballot
question seven and I know there's four
different questions that all relate to
the same topic
but we were when we were drafting the
questions we just felt it would be
better to sit there and bring forth
different questions to change different
sections of the charter but they all
interrelate and they all deal with the
same thing so Seven 8 nine and 10 so the
first question is question ballot
question seven shall the town Charter be
revised to begin the town budget process
sooner and set earlier deadlines for
budget proposal submissions by Town
departments only reason to sit there and
and vote Yes for this is to speed up the
or to push the budget process forward so
that we can get the two referendums on
the same
date and if you hold your questions till
the end there's one question that has
specific issues that you'll want to
address and so this one is a very minor
item question eight uh ballot question
eight sell the town Charter be revised
to hold the annual Town budget meeting
in the second week of April instead of
in may only reason to do this is to line
the two referendums
up ballot question nine is the one where
you might have some questions so we're
going to sit there and go through this
one so ballot question nine shall the
town Charter be revised to eliminate the
Quorum requirement for the annual town
budget meeting but not for any special
Tom meeting so what we're trying to say
here is that the budget meeting is going
to at least have a minimum of 12 people
there because those are the elected
officials that will show up but we have
a current Quorum and I believe Carol the
number is 25 yes corre 25 so 12 12
people will be the elected officials we
have a quorum of 25 but if we got to
24 we wouldn't want the budget not to
move to referendum so this is not
anything that
we're we're just trying to to verify
that if if the budget goes to town
meeting if we have 24 people to to show
up that budget after changes are made
are going is going to go to referendum
so the issues with related to the town
Charter everybody's worried about what
what does the town budget meeting do the
com budget meeting questions the the
budget
amounts has the ability to lower the
budget amounts and puts a thumb up
thumbs up or thumbs down so that means
those 42 people that come to the meeting
or came to the last meeting had the
authority to approve or to put the
budget down and send it back to the
board of Finance to redo it
so what did we have to do to try to get
this on the
same the referendums on the same
day we did not change the authority of
the town meeting to lower a budget line
item the town budget meeting still has
the authority to lower a a budget line
item and if a budget item is lowered and
it passes through the town chart to
through the town budget meeting that
line item at its reduced rate would then
move to the townwide referendum
so all we're doing in this issue is
eliminating the true up or down on the
budget by the people that attend the
town budget meeting that's it we're not
sitting there saying anything else you
still can lower a line item you can
still try to sit there and and get the
votes to sit there and and decrease a
line item the current town meeting
budget meeting has no authority to
increase the budget it can't increase
the budget it can only lower the
budget the goal of this is once we
adjourn that meeting that budget as it's
done with the the potentially lowered
line items moves to townwide referendum
on the same day as the ram budget
referendum that's all we did that's all
the changes that were
made anybody have any questions related
to this
real quick you eliminating the Quorum
requirement
completely yes we have to eliminate the
Quorum requirement completely so in
essence one person can show up and vote
well like I said there would be 12
elected officials that show up just want
to point that out understood but
somebody's got to open the
meeting
Liz yeah so about about that
um I guess the point is and especially
when you showed the voting and the
turnout from the last slide or
two so I mean I've been to many of these
meetings and sometimes it's a very big
meeting and then sometimes it's very
small so the point of this is the people
that get that are there have the ability
to make the decision yay or nay or up or
down
um but it doesn't
hamstring the uh the process from moving
forward if enough towns people don't
show am I am I getting that
right um if the if we don't pass this
then the budget
fails and it gets pushed back to the
board of Finance for revisions and the
board of Finance can bring the exact
budget to the next meeting and then
somebody packs that budget meeting and
and it gets passed that's what happens
that's how our town works so you know
from my standpoint it's
a the town meeting can be packed by
Whoever has the biggest issue at that
time so the difference from my end from
my standpoint is if I go to a budget
referendum even though I have
2,389 voters I have six six to eight
times the number of residents come to
cast a ballot on the overall budget I
feel that's not what I want to sit there
and see as an elected official I want to
see
2374 people come vote but right we still
have 274 people come to vote which is
more than the
42 and and again of the 42 a minimum of
12 of them are elected officials and
probably more because the people that go
to that meeting are the people that are
elected officials because they feel they
have to get there to sit there and and
they they want to be part of the process
and so it's just a question of is it is
the up and down vote so important for
the town
meeting or is it more important to try
to get more people to participate in
both budgets
referendums and that's the question so
well what are attempt was was to sit
there and
get 506 people to come and vote for the
budgets and give an up or down
appropriately for the entire community
so that that's that's what this is about
l
so um Joan
Ebert I can appreciate you know the
sentiment of getting more people
involved um um having been involved the
last few years quite you know intensely
no matter what we try you know the same
people or the people that truly care are
the people that are going to come here
you know to to the meetings or to vote
you know um you know I appreciate the
Don denley's and the Scott Sayad and you
know people that notoriously really do
care and bring points forward um okay so
that's being said about that I don't
know if the the end result is ever going
to be the same especially when it comes
to the ram budget um having put a lot of
effort into getting some information out
there um but we'll see what happens and
then my other point is I really am very
afraid of speeding up the process in
this town I feel like having people that
are already you know Eric himself who
has a lot on his plate um you know the
Public Works Foreman that's responsible
for a big part of the budget putting
things together notoriously each year
that we've received budgets at the
Timeline that we had previous there's
always been things added at the end or
things brought to us um I just feel like
moving it a whole month sooner is not
really allowing the Departments to do
their due diligence and do a good job at
presenting a a budget I think everyone's
very busy um they've got their own tasks
to do and this is adding pressure on the
town employe employes that have to
present things that's my
opinion okay Kine der
roer so my opinion is combining the ram
referendum with the town vote is I think
uh a wonderful thing to do I think it'll
give people that don't typically vote
for the ram referendum or an opportunity
to be there and do it at that time I
think it'll be a better repres
presentation of the town of
Andover um and secondly ballot question
number nine it's just eliminating the
the Corum requirement that's all that we
really need to discuss here so instead
of having 25 people I'm understanding
eliminating that to be uh who who you
know whoever shows up plus the
representation of the board of
Selectmen um and the board of uh Finance
can move the budget to referendum that's
all it is is the number of
people for the Quorum
requirement
right okay does anyone have any
questions on ballot question
nine okay we're gonna move on to ballot
question 10 which is just you know the
last of these items so ballot question
10 shall the town Charter be revised so
that the budget passed by the annual
Town budget meeting may go straight to
referendum on the same day as the Region
8 School District budget referendum just
to align the two items and the two
referendum dates anybody have any
questions on this
item okay I'm G move on to item ballot
question
11 ballot question 11 shall the town
Charter be revised to provide the
authority to pass ordinances to the
board of Selectmen while authorizing
voters to petition to referendum and
repeal any ordinance passed by the board
before it be can become effective so
just so everybody's aware an ordinance
is a piece of legislation and enacted by
a municipal
Authority um this question you know the
board of selectman is you know we could
pass an ordinance but we're subject to
all the hearing requirements and all the
notices and everything else that are is
currently in within the charter so we're
not going to pass uh an ordinance in the
dark and it's not going to be handled by
like that
so we talked about uh you know as this
was brought up and and it was discussed
thoroughly in front of the charter
revision commission so what we we did
was we put
in a a very detailed
way
of trying to sit there and move an
ordinance from passed by the board of
selectman to referendum so there's been
some concern as to the language required
the language is 50 signatures it's 50
signatures or 2% of the voting
public Carol is that incorrect or not
just so everybody's aware it's 25 people
that is correct 25 people okay so let's
talk about the the the signature
requirements of of of sorry 50 people
it's 50 signatures so let's talk about
that it's not 25 my bad it's 50 people
so the PTA could collect 50 signatures
the Democratic town committee could
collect 50 signatures the Republican
Town committee could collect 50
signatures and it's you could all
combine to C signatures so the way that
the repeal process would work is
everyone in the town of Andover would
have to receive the text related to the
ordinance the ordinance text would be
mailed to your house by
mailer the timeline on the collection of
the signatures will not start until that
mailer is received by the town clerk's
office the town clerk stamps the mailer
into receipt and from that point on
everyone in town would have 21 days to
sit there and collect 50 signatures that
would send the ordinance to the next
referendum next regularly scheduled
referendum everything we tried to do
here was about efficiency without
wasting time wasting money if we if the
board of Select passed an ordinance that
ordinance and it got 50 signatures and
it got moved to referendum it would go
to the next election in May or
November yeah Jeff I just wanted to say
it's 20 days not
21 20 days I'm sorry I took a day away
from everybody I apologize so 20 days
from the day that it's received by the
town clerk's office not by the day it
was passed by the board of Selectmen or
any other arbitrary item it's when the
mailer is received and stamped in by the
town clerk's office so
there are plenty of ordinances that we
have discussed at the board of Selectmen
and ordinances that we have not passed
and not put on any special town meeting
because uh personally I don't like to
call people to special Town meetings for
items
that um I don't I don't you know I could
we could sit there and schedule a
special town meeting all the time it's
going to cost the ton money it's going
to have people have to come in and and
vote so we we have chosen as a board uh
to u to roll up multiple items on any
special town meeting so if you remember
the last to meeting we had lot line
adjustments that were brought up at the
last town meeting we had uh issues
related to uh other items on that town
meeting there were probably five or six
items on that agenda at that special
town meeting because we have ganged all
those items off Eric does a good job of
organizing them all and they're all
brought up uh at the special Town
meetings and we choose not to call it so
in this situ situation it's you've
elected a board of
Selectmen most of the board of Selectmen
have received three to 500 votes from
the residents of the
Town we're not going to put into effect
an ordinance that
is negatively impacting a significant
number of the Town people but we might
sit there and put in an ordinance that
sits there and and requires somebody to
not walk their dog on the Veterans
Memorial Field and allow their dog to
defecate on our field without getting
fined for that that would be an
ordinance we would put in place that
would be an ordinance that you could get
50 signatures together with and that
would be an ordinance that if you got
those 50 signatures would go to
referend so uh if we pass something that
was egregious you put it to referendum
and you vote it down if we pass
something that's common sense you let it
move forward and if you believe that
we're doing something bad you don't
elect us the next time that election
comes
around so that's that's my take on all
this so Katherine mcal Lewis you were
the first one with your hand
up hi okay hello um all right first of
all you ad you mentioned a couple of
things the first one being that when
you're doing this as the board of
Selectmen you have all these regul
ations and things that you have to go
through to get them the W is there and
those I think were put there for exactly
that purpose to make sure that you are
that there is a checks and balances and
you're doing what you're supposed to do
before you put in ordinances
secondly um you left to go to the dog
poop one that's a good one for everybody
but if we use a better one such as
changing when people pay their taxes
that's an ordinance and you guys could
pass it
anytime and whether people want to pay
their taxes on a different day or
annually or daily whatever you wanted um
you are still asking people now to go
out get the form make sure that form is
filled in completely and correctly
otherwise you can just deny it then get
the 50 signatures in 20 days uh you
think it takes nothing to get signat
that's not true and
um and and then go through coming to the
board I
just I I think that those checks and
balances were put there for a reason and
this Authority should not be taken away
from from the residents of the
Town that's it for
now okay Liz
um that's exactly what I was going to
say I mean I think a um there's been a
lot of criticism especially in the last
Board of selectman meeting you know with
this whole Charter thing
about the board of Selectmen wanting to
take over power blah blah blah blah and
I
think um I I don't think that's a fair
assessment but this
question this one kind of bothers me
because to it may seem like some to
Someone Like You Folks who are on these
boards and you may know everybody in
town getting 50 signatures may not be a
problem but I I think I think that's
problematic if somebody
sees and I'm not even sure how often a
new ordinance comes into play it may not
even be that big of a deal but it's the
Optics the Optics looks like okay you
guys can make this decision and then
all you have to all you taxpayers have
to do is you
know oppose it collect your 50
signatures blah blah blah so I I just I
just think the 50 signature thing is a
stickler for me um and I wish there was
just a different way to handle this um
so for
me yeah I'm I'm I'm not a fan of this
particular one
I guess uh that's all I can say I'm not
a fan of this particular one I get what
you're trying to say I get your trying
what you're trying to do but it it does
look like optic wise probably doesn't
look as good for the bard of Select even
though I know that's not what your
attention
is okay shanon
loud yeah um I just wanted to comment
that the change that you're proposing to
the Charter
is not only about ordinances and I
didn't see any question that talks about
the other part of or parts of the
revision one of which is that would give
solely the board of Selectmen the
authority to create consolidate modify
or abolish permanent board commission
department or agency not otherwise
provided for in the charter um which is
almost as concerning to me as the
proposition about the ordinance um I
have a similar concern that many of the
questions about the budget are very
overs simplistic as far as the
significant changes um that are going to
be made to the process by the proposed
Charter changes so I'll give you an
example um because I don't think any one
of the questions affects this Jeff which
ballot question necessitates the new
otd which replaces the board of finance
budget hearing with a joint Board of
Selectmen Board of Finance meeting at
which the presence of just three
Selectmen would constitute a quorum
there are a number of questions on the
ballot that don't match up with or don't
fully explain um the very significant
changes that are being made specifically
to the budget process and the
involvement of the board of Selectmen in
addition to the board of Finance in
addition to the Town Administrator in
the budget process so specifically I'm
concerned that the questions don't match
up with the the proposed changes that
are being made um to the Charter and
that to me is is really disingenuous to
try to put those questions out and then
change the charter in ways um that
aren't questioned on the
ballot Shannon I I I would just tell you
that that's not the intent there's
nothing in there that's sitting there we
trying
to hide anything in the questions what I
I'm not accusing you of the intent I'm
not accusing the intent Shannon Shannon
I understand it but I'm just telling you
these questions you can read the entire
Charter all of these questions are
trying to line up they were they were
prepared and reviewed by the entire
Charter revision commission we attempted
to sit there and do the best possible
job we can if we didn't line it up
exactly that's that's okay I mean for me
I I mean I'm just telling you the
reality of what we're trying to get done
and accomplished and we're talking about
on this question the issue related to
passing ordinances I I refer back for
everyone to the number of people that
come to a town
meeting so uh and
and this is another question that maybe
there is a little bit better way to do
it but this is not something that I I
look at for anyone here that I'm sorry I
sit there and I look at 50 signatures
and I know Katherine mcal Lewis can say
no and she can sit there and you can we
can determine that it's difficult to get
50 signatures I don't necessarily
believe that's the case I believe that
if you really didn't want the board of
selectman to pass an ordinance I
guarantee you the Democratic town
committee and the Republican Town
committee depending upon which side of
this they were on would get the 50
signatures so um
but
Jeff Jeff the 50 signatures only applies
to the ordinances it does not apply to
the creation modification abolition or
whatnot of town boards and agencies so
you didn't address the question name
name one board or agency that is not
noted within the charter that we would
abolish give me
a I don't need to do that Jeff it gives
you
asking you it's got to be an un it can't
be named in the charter name
one no but you can modify the boards
Jeff you can create new boards Jeff that
take away the powers of existing
agencies it is not named in the charter
okay
Jeff name the fact of the matter is is
name something you want to sit there and
put it out in public please name
something show the public what we could
do that is wrong and I'm okay with it
I'm not I'm not I'm not arguing with you
to try to to create a problem asking you
to name one of the boards not named in
the charter that the board of Selectmen
would and could abolish Committee for
Public
Safety you could create a Committee for
Public Safety you could create another
committee that takes away some of the
powers of an existing committee Jeff it
simply says you can't affect the boards
and committees that are named in the
charter you can create or modify any of
the committees or
commissions and that the my my problem
with that Jeff is not just that fact but
it's the fact that the question that
supposedly deals with this issue isn't
even on the ballot all it says is
discussion of ordinances it doesn't say
anything about this additional power
that is going to come solely to the
select it is it is because those Tom
boarding agencies have to be you know
created or or or abolished by ordinance
so it's all in the same issue it's all
about an ordinance so if we sit there
and created an ordinance to establish a
new agency or a new board we'd have to
create an ordinance and you would sit
there and and sit there and object to
that ordinance and you would sit there
and go through the process that's what
this is about this is not a special
power that hides in the background that
we're sitting there attempting to do if
if the board of Selectmen wanted to to
um abolish an agency we'd have to create
an ordinance we'd have to go through the
process we'd write the ordinance we'd
sit there and and and and you'd be able
to go into public speak Shannon and
you'd be able to sit there and and
object to it and then then if the board
of Selectmen passed that and and sent
out the notice to the community you
would be able to collect 50 signatures
and put it on the ballot that's the
issue it's it's not something that
sitting in the background it's not it's
an
ordinance let me let me jump in here
janon um the language that you're
talking about that you find
objectionable had to be changed there
already was existing language talking
about these um unnamed uh commissions or
or or organizations and this language
had to be changed in order to stay
consistent with the change in the
ordinance language that is being
described in ballot question 11 this is
not a separate power this is taking the
existing language and making it so that
it remains consistent with the larger
body of the the the the charter this
isn't a separate power that that's being
granted this is there already was
authority to the board of Selectmen if
you look at what's being being struck
out and the change in that language is
just so that the entire the entire
document is internally
consistent okay where I don't know I'm
I'm just going to ask this because Jeff
you're going question by question and I
don't see this addressed by any of the
questions so you're asking me what
additional powers or what additional
things so I'm going to give an example
two all new
sections of 802 the duties on the budget
were
created one of them is that the Town
Administrator can comment and make
recommendations on the budget requests
made by various departments offices and
agencies and the board of education is
noted by definition as an agency of the
town where is that in any of the
questions that are on the ballot because
that's a whole new Authority for the
Town Administrator that's question one
question
two somehow there's now going to be a
proposed if this goes through
again not a question on the ballot but a
question to deal with the budget or new
powers under the budget supposed to be
joint meetings of the board of Selectmen
and the board of
Finance to conduct business about the
budget somewhat I think taking away the
power of the board of Finance so my
whole point here is that the questions
which I know were thoroughly reviewed
and everything and frankly
there are probably way too many
questions and way too many issues that
you're asking the electorate to address
and that's a whole problem here but
you've granted by virtue of the proposed
questions new authority to the Town
Administrator and to the board of
Selectmen that aren't covered by any of
the questions on the ballot and that's
my primary concern tonight thank
you okay um um I would sit there and go
the reason why and again I go back to
the same issue to do these items the
board of Selectmen would have to create
an ordinance to abolish or create an
agency going to your question of powers
granted to the town to to the
administrator in the budget process the
Town Administrator creates the budget
puts the budget together and presents
that budget to the board of Finance who
approves that budget so I don't
understand and and I don't want to get
into a long dissertation because Shannon
vote no and I'm okay with already did
thank you it's good vote no and I would
tell you the Town Administrator does all
that work so to be able to ask any
agency including the board of education
for information that assists in
preparing that budget I don't understand
where that becomes problematic because
he does not currently have the authority
Jeff to make recommendations to the
Board of Education that's why Agency for
information so you're telling me and
you're telling me the Board of Education
will not provide information to the Town
Administrator to that's not what it says
Jeff okay read the language thank you
very much I'll read it Town
Administrator make comments and make
recommendations on budget requests made
by various agencies which includes the
Board of Education he has no Authority
now to make recommendations on our
budget requests by law by Statute by
Charter okay thank you next question
anybody Stephen King well I'm just going
to Echo some of the sentiments of the
young ladies before me that uh you know
obviously this puts a lot of power
within the board of Selectmen um and you
PR this discussion by note noting a drop
in attendance that drop in attendance
speaks volumes as far as trying to get
people involved in just getting
signatures um the timeline is narrow and
uh I think severely limits the recourse
uh for the residents uh uh in a
situation where something is passed that
uh um just is just not in the best
interest of the town okay and I'll tell
you why I believe the town meeting had
had less attendance in the last cycle
and that is because the board of
Selectmen and the board of finance and
the Board of Education have all done a
much better job of trying to be as
transparent as they possibly can be and
there were no major issues addressed
that everybody was sitting there and had
was up in arms over so I believe that
the town meeting didn't generate any
controversy in the last go round the
times before when there is a little bit
higher uh participation in those Town
meetings there was controversy generated
by one or more issues that were out
there so I would tell you that the last
meeting uh of the town meeting didn't
have very much participation because
personally I think we've done a very
good job and the issue that I'm trying
to address is I'm trying to get it away
from the town meeting of up or down and
just get the 500 residents that will
actually show up and vote to get a more
democratic process out there and more
people you know voting on all of the
budgets that we have to pass so that
includes RAM and includes the town
budget so understood but my the focus of
my point was that the narrow window uh
uh for a petition to referendum that
that is of uh greatest concern to me
everybody would have a minimum of two to
three months of of anybody participating
anybody that comes to a meeting and sits
there and you know a something at the
board of selectman doesn't happen within
one meeting it very rarely ever does
happen within one meeting it's usually
and especially an ordinance would be a
process because we'd have to sit there
and express what we wanted to do with
the ordinance we'd have to have it
written by the town attorney we would
then have to get it back and and send it
out as a public notice and have a public
hearing so it's not a small window and
it's not a tiny window the 20 days is
after the
2,368 residents get their their notice
that here is the potential proposed uh
ordinance by the board of select the
reality is it could happen in one
meeting that's my
point again it can't because it has to
go to public hearing so Katherine
mcol hi um my issue again with this is
the fact that and I agree with Shannon
I'm sorry but I do that you are taking a
lot of the responsibility from the town
residents or the authority from the town
residents and giving it to the board of
Selectmen and that's not what town
meeting that that's not the town meeting
form of government that we have and I
don't think that you and you can say
you're right there's been a lot of good
things everyone's done and perhaps that
has led to less people coming out but I
would also say that the local government
here doesn't do a really good job of
letting everybody know what's going on
and trying to get people involved and
even when we want to get someone uh to
volunteer because we need somebody on a
specific board
all you do is put I I I see it in the
paper there's an opening on such and
such board you don't say what the board
does how many times do it meet what it's
there for what it's supposed to H happen
nothing there's nothing to entice people
to get together and try to come in it's
just there's here it is there's an
opening so if people knew more about
what was going on I think you'd get more
people to come
out okay
Bob hamburger I think there's an
important part of this that that needs
to be brought out that uh folks folks
may be missing so if the board of
selectman passes an ordinance and the
mailer goes out that 20-day period the
ordinance is held in abeyance it does
not go into effect until the end of that
20-day period And if the petitions the
the the 50 signatures are collected and
submitted within that 20-day period it
never goes into into effect until uh a
referendum is held and that 20-day
period is not a do or die kind of thing
if a if uh the board of Selectmen passes
an ordinance that ordinance goes into
effect and the public at any point after
that decides we don't like this collect
50 signatures submit it again the
ordinance go gets suspended until the
next uh referendum is held
so this isn't a do or die kind of thing
and this kind of language was insisted
upon by several members of the the
charter revision commission when we talk
about uh uh checks and balances we
wanted to make sure that there was an
accessible ongoing open-ended way
of reversing what the board of Selectmen
might have passed and I don't I don't
think that has been has been presented
adequately okay
I'm confused anyone else
Liz sorry I don't I don't want to
belabor this but maybe a simple question
maybe this would help
um how were ordinances approved but
prior to this I don't have the original
charter in front of me how how were they
approved before could maybe um maybe
that be answered sure they would go in
front of a a a special town meeting so
42 residents including 12 elected
officials would sit there and up or down
on a Town ordinance it's either that or
you know you allow the board of
selectman do it and if you don't like
what the ordinance is you sit there and
gather 50 signatures and it goes for
reference so the original way is it
would go to a Tom
meeting okay Bata
uh yes Jee did you say there was a cost
associated with the meetings and
referendums and can you uh share with us
what that
is well I believe that we were talking
about this on Friday and I believe the
number was somewhere between you know
500 and ,000 for town meeting but Carol
Lee would be much better about a town
meeting um as far as the overall cost of
that but the reason why and one of the
things beata is we're not doing a
special referendum
what we talked about is to be as
efficient and as open as possible is if
the signatures were collected and
everything was approved it would go to
the next general election within town so
there would be no extra cost related to
the referendum timeline it would just be
the cost of the special town meeting so
Carol if or Eric either one of you that
has a basic number for the
community have to send a mailer out and
that is anywhere between three and $400
depending on the size of
it and then the cost
of I believe the registar or Deputy
registar
salary hour that they so the hourly cost
that we're paying for the employees to
come and participate and check off the
the names of the individuals that come
to
vote thank you
anybody else on this
issue
okay we're going to move to item
12 uh ballot question 12 shall the town
Charter be revised to increase the
minimum dollar amount to require special
town meeting approval for bonding or
other forms of financing to a figure
exceeding
$50,000 for any repayment term of more
than one year this question increases
the threshold from $10,000 to
$50,000 any questions on this topic this
is really meant to just be more
efficient and eliminate the need to call
a special town meeting or something that
might be a copy lease something along
that
lines okay no questions I'm going to
move on to ballot question
13 ballot question 13 sell the town
Charter revised to increase the minimum
amount to require special town meeting
approval for any Grant of financial aid
from any source to a grant that requires
the town to provide a local match of
$25,000 or more the current threshold
for a special town meeting for the
amount of money that a town would need
to put into a grant is currently $1 so
we're moving that to
$25,000 so what this is saying is if we
receive a grant that requires a 20%
contribution and that is a
$125,000 grant and we get we're going to
get $100,000 from a state federal or
philanthropic
organization um the town could sit there
and apply and and accept a grant that
requires us to put in $25,000 or less if
it's greater than $25,000 we need to go
to a special tongue meeting any
questions on that item
okay everybody's tired now all right
ballot question 14 shall the town
Charter be rise to increase the minimum
amount requiring special T meeting
approval to any proposed supplemental
appropriation of 1% or more of the
current Town budget the current
threshold for that is
0.5 so we're looking to increase that to
0.1 that's basically and the way that
this is
calculated is it's
0.005 of the AES board of education
budget and the town operating budget it
does not include Ram so it's 0.5 of
those two components basically $8
million so it's moving that threshold
from $40,000 to $80,000
any questions on that
item Stephen King I'm I'm just curious
how often this has hampered you say
within the past two
years uh has not because I wouldn't sit
there and
um we would normally deal with this
during the budget process but there are
certain situations where we may run into
something and we might want to get it
done out of our current current
operating budget or our fund balance and
this would just
allow other boards of Selectmen to be
able to sit there and deal with a
different
threshold any other questions on this
one okay question 15 ballot question
15 shall the town Charter be revised to
provide that any proposed supplemental
appropriation that exceeds 2.5% of the
current Town budget or approximately 200
or $200,000 whichever is greater must be
sent directly to a referendum vote so
this question is specifically related to
the town mower that was just approved uh
at the last town meeting so this was one
of the items that was on the last town
meeting that we had um we had an
opportunity to purchase a mower and that
mower because of the limited inventory
that's out there and available a
decision was made to sit there
and put the town mower in the budget for
the current year normally that but that
would have went on the budget for the
following year and we would have paid it
but we needed to get it done in the
current year and we had a significant
number of people come to the meeting it
got passed it was a fairly tight vote
but it did get passed and it's a it was
a lease so it wasn't as if we paid 220
or 205 or $210,000 for the mower all at
once it's a fiveyear lease
but
um it was a member of the charter
revision commission that really wanted
to make sure that that type of
expenditure didn't just sit there and go
to town meeting that it was required to
go to townwide referendum so a greater
number of people would vote on it so
normally those types of items would
happen during the budget vote they
wouldn't be special Appropriations and
and we wouldn't sit there and try to do
a supplemental appropriation for
something like that this was an an odd
circumstance it's the only time that's
ever happened in the time I've been on a
board of Selectmen
but the member of the the charter
revision commission was not happy that
the vote of the town meeting came out
that way and so they requested that it
go directly to referendum so that more
people would get to vote on so I see Liz
you have a
question yes so this
is for items greater than
$200,000 right
yes what was it
before Oh we would never go to special
we would never go to a
referendum um was was there a Dollar
figure before the2 200 th000 dollar
figure uh it was one of the dollar
figures that we would have had in here
so you know this would be a special time
so it would be 40
Grand so it would be related to this
number we took this this ballot question
14 is 0.005% or
$40,000 so if we were trying to make a
supplemental appropriation of greater
than $440,000 which we were we had to go
to a special time meeting which we did
and then the mower got
approved so what what is being stated
and what the charter revision commission
is saying is anything in excess of
$200,000 should not just be a uh voted
on by the town meeting because in
reality there's a limited number of
people that vote that go to these Town
meetings they have an an an amount of
authority to to push things forward and
to be really honest the town meeting and
in the past has been packed by the side
that wants something done for themselves
and that's that's just the reality of
our our form of government related to
the town meeting so what this is about
is this is about trying to move
something of that great an expense that
is off the budget cycle to move it to a
townwide referendum and that that's the
thought because in reality if something
came up that was greater than $200,000
currently and it was for the benefit of
one of the Town agencies that really
wanted to see it pass they would pack
the town meeting and get
it okay so how do we know what would be
allowed for this sort of
appropriation I mean anything under
$200,000 could kind of slip through it
would be a truck no it still comes down
to we'd still have to go to town meeting
on anything in excess of
$80,000 in excess of 80,000
corre
yeah because ballot question 14 and
ballot question 15 relate in certain
ways the ballot question 14 relates to
what's the threshold to do a
supplemental appropriation and to sit
there and have it go in front of a town
meeting or
not so ballot question 14 is the current
threshold was $40,000 it would move to
$80,000 if it was an item of need and
and and and understand this
still and and Eric correct me I'm wrong
or or or Carol still needs Board of
Finance approval like we didn't sit
there and the board of selectman didn't
just send the mower to um town meeting
without Board of Finance
approval that is correct it was approved
for purchase by
CIP and then the board of Selectmen and
then the board of Finance
and then it went to town meeting okay so
from from this standpoint that even if
we wanted to do this even if we wanted
to spend $80,000 the current form of
government the current form of
government is that the board of Finance
still needs to approve
that okay okay thank you can I point out
one other thing that's just a
technicality is that these are
cumulative so this means in any given
year
all supplemental Appropriations in
total have that threshold on them this
is not for an individual thing this is
collective throughout that budget cycle
what is
allowed
okay all right um Liz are you
done
um now I'm not so sure now you flip back
to question question 15 because question
15 is what I was looking at when I asked
the question and then you went back to
14 and I'm like wait what happened to
the
$200,000 because you asked me what the
current threshold
is so it
was it is
$40,000 currently for
Appropriations
okay and as Eric pointed out it's
cumulative
so so well let's walk through what we
did with the the mower so the mower was
brought up in front of of Public Works
and the Town Administrator asked for
this to be evaluated CIP evaluated it
and said it's a good idea it then went
to the board of Selectmen and we sat
there and said it was a good idea it
then went in front of the board of
finance and they sat there and said okay
we agree with it also it then had to go
to a town meeting which we had we had
the one meeting which was ganged up lot
line adjustments everything else and the
town meeting voted on
this and so that was done at that
special town
meeting if we had
items so anything over $40,000 this
threshold on question 14 was going to
have to go to special meeting the town
mower even with the new threshold would
have had to go to town
meeting and actually it wouldn't go to
town meeting now if we vote for this it
would go directly to referendum
this is a very odd this is a very odd
item I would sit there and tell you that
um so I've been on the board about 10
years this is the first time we ever
chose to deal with anything like this
this would normally go through the
budget cycle it was very so it would
still okay it would still go to
referendum it wouldn't necessarily need
a special town meeting is what you're
okay gotcha right
okay I'm good thank you Joanne Ebert was
up
next sorry I just wanted to add on to
having been involved in it that it you
know was presented to the board of
Finance as being a very um the reason it
didn't like you said the normal process
is to go through budgeting year toe and
it should have been
anticipated
beforehand and been included in a few
fut budget or the present budget but it
was presented that it was you know a
specialized item that if we didn't wa if
we waited it wouldn't be available so
all of those circumstances but it does
bring up the thought you
know I'm a little leer of some of the
ballot questions just because of the
cumulative effect um of everything that
Eric brought up um but um that that's
what happened the hope hopefully the
hope is that people budget accordingly
so that there's not
additional um
Appropriations you know made to the
taxpayers that have already passed a
budget well um just just to clarify that
this this was the mower was $200,000
financed over five years it was
$5,000 that would be in the Department
of Public Works Capital Equipment
fund so what we had to what was done and
the request and the reason why it was
made was because there was limited
inventory on those mowers and if we
waited till the beginning of the next
fiscal year and went through our
budgeting process we would not have been
we would not have had availability to
buy that
mower so it was a first come first serve
thing for the dealer that had the mower
and that was the choice that was made
but it was only
$50,000 and then and then the next
$50,000 was in the budget cycle for the
following year but because of it
cumulative total that's what had to
happen thank you
Shannon go one second Shannon go ahead
Eric just as a clarification under the
current budget the way it says is leases
or lease options to which the town
including the local Board of education
is a party to which involve a term of
obligation in excess of one
year have to go to special meeting so
currently if I bought if I leased
something that cost the town $1 per
year that is technically supposed to go
to a town meeting unless it falls under
the title of a lease of
Personality um which which means like
general office thing so if Public Works
bought a $20,000 item that they were
going to lease over three years that
would automatically go to special
meeting under our current
system that's just I just want to point
out what's in our actual Charter
now okay
Shannon yeah hopefully an easy question
um where does it say what Eric has
described as cumulative I didn't see
that anywhere in the charter or the
charter
revisions okay that would be item F
under
304f which says any appropriation from
the capital non-recurring expense fund
not included in the annual budget which
exceeds one quarter of 1% of the budget
as specified that's what it says now so
right now that's the way it reads
are you looking at it Channon or do you
have any other questions yeah I'm
looking at it I'm just curious how one
would understand or I'm even looking at
it and it refers to section 805b so
you've got to go there how does that get
to the cumulative Eric if you can just
explain it in layman's terms so to
speak because it's the total
appropriation from the capital and non-
reoccurring
budget well Shannon I would sit there
and I would go that's the way that we've
interpreted it for the years that I've
been on the board so it's always been a
cumulative
number okay thank you
all right any other questions related to
ballot question
15 okay ballot question 16 this is just
a legal EAS issue so shall the town
Charter be revised to delete transition
sections 1012 1013 and 1014 which shall
be recorded in the office of the town
clerk for reference so this question is
meant to delete sections that were
modified by uh prior Charter revision
commissions and to simplify the the
current document anybody have any
questions related to this
item okay
so I I personally I want to thank
everybody this is the most U attended
meeting that we've had on Zoom I really
believe um I would tell you that all of
the information that we we had here is
available or will be available on the
town website so
um I would ask that you sit there and
share it with your other residents who
weren't here hopefully they can come and
watch this tape it's also recorded it'll
be available so that people who were not
available to attend can sit there and
come and uh get information as to how
they uh want to answer the ballot
questions around there apologize that
the ballot is so long but uh it's how we
chose to sit there and try to get the
these questions in smaller form but uh
not one big long dissertation for each
thing so I personally believe that um as
Louise Goodman said that we probably
should all go to early voting to sit
there and deal with all of these
questions and get them answered uh you
can sit there and take the sample ballot
and have it filled out beforehand so you
know what questions you want to answer
yes and hopefully you'll answer yes on
all of them because it will make town
government more efficient you you may
not but that's okay so I can make my
pitch for that um anybody else right now
we're going to move on to uh public
speak unless somebody has a question Bob
yeah I just wanted to I I've been uh
taking a look at um this is just to
address some of the things that Shannon
said a little earlier I've been looking
at some of the sections that um she
brought up that uh she said you know
represent additional powers for the
board of Selectmen um or for the Town
Administrator and that weren't
referenced within uh these changes I
mean she she spoke about section 802 for
example the board of Finance may suggest
a target for expenditures and I the last
line there says however the target shall
not be binding with respect to budget
submittals and similarly uh the Town
Administrator May comment and make
recommendations on the budget requests
and Shannon was claiming that these are
additional Powers the way that I that
quite frankly is I as an individual
could go to Every Board of Education
meeting and do exactly those same things
these are additional
responsibilities for the uh for the the
the individuals that are named there but
they are not additional authorities or
Powers as I read that language so
Shannon you and I can take this offline
and and discuss this but this is this is
how I see uh the language that that you
think is is granting unenumerated
Powers all right any other questions
related to the ballot questions before
we move to public
speak okay so um there's nothing that's
going to get done at this meeting no
motions no votes no nothing like that
but we're going to move to item four
public speak uh Katherine mcal
Lewis hi um one of the things I had
asked at that meeting was why we
couldn't put the language update the
language in the chter and have language
that's 20th let alone 21st century and
take out most legal and take
the which by the way I spent a year of
my life doing and it wasn't easy but it
was worth doing and take maybe a things
that are over a paragraph that could be
done in three sentences and I don't know
why we're not willing to do that I don't
understand it because people shouldn't
have if this is the document to help the
people of the Town govern the town I
don't understand why it shouldn't be in
clear concise
language all right thank you Bob
hamburger uh can you come back to me I'm
still thinking about I have something to
say but come back to me in in a few
people Joan Ebert
Jeff did you call me Joanne Joanne sorry
okay yep um I'm not I've already said
quite a bit during the night so I won't
say too much um I just am very concerned
with the timeline of moving the budget
preparation all of the Town departments
Our Town Administrator you know they all
have daily jobs to do and tasks to do
and it may sound easy and I understand
hoping to get all those additional
voters out I would love it too I'd love
to see a lot more voting for The Ram
referendum um I just feel like we're
putting way too much pressure on
everybody to prepare the documents
double check it make sure it's correct
and then present it to the board of
Finance or whatever the process you know
needs to do um just too much of a change
thank
you okay um I'm GNA call on Scott person
because we didn't have a normal meeting
so Scott would you like to say anything
Jeff I heard
enough okay Philip
hovie yeah I'm good I appreciate um all
the com uh comments and conversations so
thank you very much elain
Bart yeah I just um I just want to thank
you for doing this meeting really
appreciate it and um like you said it's
been recorded So it's going to go out
there so people can go ahead and check
into it I know the the people who are
doing early
voting just about all of them knew we
were having this meeting tonight decided
nope we're just going to get it done so
that's okay um but thank you very much
for this Shannon
L thanks also um I just want to thank
you for having this meeting and also say
that I encourage everybody who's on this
meeting and others who are going to vote
on these very important Charter
revisions to actually look at the
charter revisions that are being
proposed because as I tried to make
clear I think there are very overs
simplistic explanations about very
significant changes being made
especially to the budget process that I
don't think the questions on the ballot
accurately reflect and having voted
today and having looked at all the
questions previously I've made comments
to that effect for a while but um now
it's here and it's on the ballot and
please please review act the actual
changes uh that are being posed because
there's a lot more than the questions
actually reflect thanks okay Eric
Anderson I'm good okay Steve
Willard just thanks Jeff and thanks to
the uh recent Charter revision committee
for for putting all this together thank
you right Jerry
kmet or an kmet hi it's me Ann um I
really feel the same way as Shannon did
I think there's a lot of
changes that are in that whole document
and the questions do not clearly reflect
that there's so many details that are
being changed and I'm not happy with the
question that's it thank you Michael
sinowitz all set thank you Katherine
Hutchinson I have nothing to say
additionally thank
you Carol
Lee set thank you Dave
castani um I just wanted to thank the
charter revision committee and the sikan
I think there was a lot of information I
think it was pretty clear and I
appreciate all the hard work everybody's
done thanks thank you Bata
gamsky thank you to everyone who has
taking the time to work on this and
thank you for uh giving us the
opportunity to ask these questions and
to bring this information to us that's
all lean
Hutchinson no thank you okay Stephen
King I'll Echo the uh support for the
work the committee did um obvious VI L
you can't please everybody um I see
positive in some of the um language uh
there's a number of things I disagree
with but uh thanks again for the effort
and uh appreciate the work you
do Kathleen
wart um thank you for the meeting it was
very informative um I think y all did a
wonderful job and I think this meeting
was very informative my only concern is
is I truly believe that a lot of the
individuals who are going to vote on
these aren't really on going to
understand what they're voting on and I
think some of them may or may not pass
just because of lack of understanding
which is unfortunate thank you Liz low
catch oh I think I've I think I've said
enough thank you all um appreciate you
and um you know good luck right danan
grer
yes can you hear me can okay good um I
just like to add add my thanks to uh
everybody that made this happen um good
meeting uh Jeff you always um conduct a
good meeting I'm happy with that I hope
there's no
minimum um number of Voters that have to
answer those questions in order for it
to pass because I think most you know
John and Jane Doe out there when they
look at that 14 15 questions it's just
roll their eyes they're they're not
going to understand what what this is
all about and they just going to skip
the questions um which I think is really
unfortunate and I don't know what more
you could have done to get people
informed as to what this is all about um
but again when I looked at that ballot
and my you know my eyes just rolled
around to my head um and I'm I'm sure
that most people are just not not even
going to bother answering so I hope
there's no minimum number
um of people that have to answer all
those questions so that's it but good
job good try um I wish you all the best
of luck with it thank
you I just want to say thank you for
presenting this information and for the
productive dialogue um and to everyone
who had comments I appreciate everyone
being so engaged in the process and and
respectful throughout it so
thanks please
okay I think um we'll go back up to Bob
hamburger I just wanted to thank you
Jeff for all of your input not only as
you know for selectman but also your
work on on the commission um a week and
a half ago there was a letter to the uh
the River East in which your name and
mine were uh mentioned side to side and
I I hope the letter writer uh
understands that I appreciated that I
appreciate being uh being named in the
same context as you for all the work
that you've done here and uh also in a
in a follow-up letter last week there
was a different writer who said that
hell must have frozen over because he
agreed with the first raiter and the two
of them have diametrically opposing
viewpoints uh quite frankly I view this
as as a mark of success uh if we can get
different people with the town who come
from different perspectives to agree now
they agreed to I think vote things down
so I don't know how successful this all
is but uh you know this this really has
been an exercise in compromise which is
what what politics is and uh you know
I've been enthusiastic about it I hope
everyone realizes I'm enthusiastic about
the process and uh even at this meeting
there were I argued for some things
which I might not necessarily have
agreed with but I agree wholeheartedly
with uh the the review and revision
process as as I said uh to the reporter
at River East a couple of weeks ago when
he interviewed me this is democracy and
ction and I'm I'm pleased and proud to
be a part of it and uh I want to again
thank everybody that was on the
commission everybody on the board of
selectman uh this is a complicated and
uh challenging assignment that we all
took on and uh you know it's up to the
voters at this point so thanks again I
don't think I missed anyone but if I did
did
I okay so um I I want to Echo a couple
thoughts I want to Echo Kimberly's
thoughts I I really appreciate everybody
um participating in the meeting even if
we uh disagree it was it was done in in
an appropriate manner um I I I really do
enjoy that about um these these meetings
when you can have uh some disagreement
but uh you're done you do it
respectfully I think that's great and um
I'll go to Bob's
Point um I actually take the fact that
Don Denley a bar r
Republican and Scott soet a far-left
Democrat sat there and and believe that
these issues are inaccurate I I feel
that as a a win because that means that
we're driving the bus right down the
middle of the field and we're trying to
do this in the most respectful and
appropriate manner fashion so I I
actually think that's a win and whenever
my friend Don Denley can criticize me he
he takes advantage of it and that's okay
uh but
but I think the the issues that the
charter revision commission went to
address are issues that um were
appropriate they were they were measured
we we had very good discussions on that
committee back and forth and attempting
to try to
uh allow for the most especially on the
ordinance issue I think we went forward
to try to give the most opportunities
for people to sit there and and have an
opportunity to uh disagree with the
board of selectmen's choices and to give
them the opportunity to sit there and
and force uh an ordinance to to
referendum so um thank you very much for
everybody however you vote is how how
you vote this is more informational as
much as possible and uh I thank you for
your time so I think we're we're all
done um we're going to adjourn we don't
really need to vote for it but thank you
very much for everyone attending it was
uh it was a great meeting all right
byebye thank you thank you